It's the night of June 26th, 1940. In
Bucharest, the Romanian Foreign Ministry
gets a coded telegram from Moscow. When
it's decoded, it reads like a death
sentence. The Soviet Union demands
Bessarabia and Northern Booa. Romania
has 24 hours to give a clear answer.
Refuse. And the message is blunt. The
USSR is ready to use force. Accept and
the clock starts anyway. A second note
sets the schedule. Evacuation begins
June 28th and Romania has 4 days to pull
out its army and administration.
The Romanians cave and accepted the
ultimatum. But why did Romania give up
Bessarabia so easily while Finland
fought for its land just a few months
prior? How could a country give up 17%
of its territory and nearly 4 million
people just by being asked?
First, what is Bessarabia and why was it
such a complicated issue? Bessarabia on
the northwestern coast of the Black Sea
was historically part of the
principality of Mulavia. For centuries,
it had been under the indirect rule of
the Ottoman Empire. And in the 18th
century, it became a frontier of
conflict between the Ottomans and the
Russians, which saw Basarabia being
occupied several times by Russian
troops. Eventually with the treaty of
Bucharest in 1812, the Ottomans seeded
the territory between the Prut and
Nester rivers to Russia. As the
principality of Mulavia didn't have a
word to say, the region became part of
the Russian Empire. Russian rule over
Bessarabia would last for more than a
century, but with a hiccup. After
Russia's defeat in the Crimean War, the
Treaty of Paris in 1856 forced Russia to
surrender southern Bessarabia back to
Mulavia as part of the peace terms. That
was a big problem since one of the
reasons for annexation was the access to
the Danube River. In 1859, Mulavia and
neighboring Valakia unified to form the
Romanian United Principalities, an
ethnically Romanian state which was
still vassel of the Ottoman Empire. In
1877, during the Russo Turkish War, they
rebelled against the Ottomans in order
to establish full Romanian independence.
Russia, always eager for a way to hurt
the Ottomans, lent their support in
hopes of gaining territory from the
dying empire. The war resulted in the
collapse of much of the Ottoman power in
the Balkans, which drew the attention of
the rest of Europe, who stepped in to
draw up the new territorial boundaries
of the region. The resulting treaty of
Berlin recognized the independence of
Romania, Serbia, and Montenegro.
However, it also stripped Romania of
southern Basarabia and handed it back to
the Russians in exchange for the Do Brua
region. Romania wasn't pleased, but had
no choice but to accept the terms. The
result of this mess of treaties and
territorial changes was that both Russia
and Romania felt they had a rightful
claim to Bessarabia. Russia claimed
legal recognition of its claims from the
Treaty of Berlin. While Romania saw the
treaty as a betrayal of their interests
and cited the large Romanian majority in
Bessarabia as the basis for its rightful
claim. The Romanian majority in
Bessarabia grew restless under Russian
rule in the following decades. Romanian
nationalists gained significant support
from the people and in local government
until in 1917 they had their chance. The
eruption of the Russian revolution and
implosion of the Russian Empire gave
Bessarabia its opportunity to break
free. A national council was established
and a new Mulavian Democratic Republic
was declared. Fearing Russian and
Bolevik reactions, the council invited
Romania to provide military protection.
In January 1918, Romanian troops moved
in and brought all of Bessarabia under
Romanian control. On March 27th,
the council approved a full union with
the Kingdom of Romania. If you have
enjoyed this video so far, this next
minute is brought to you by a game I've
been playing recently, Rage Shadow
Legends. It takes dark fantasy
champions, myth inspired warriors, and
entire factions, then throws them into
one massive battlefield. They've also
given me free champions to offer new
players. So, stick around cuz I'll show
you how to claim them. Raid now features
legendary champions inspired by Alice's
adventures in Wonderland, including
Alice the Wanderer, the Cheshure Cat,
Mad Hatter, Nave of Hearts, and the
fearsome Queen of Hearts. Alice is a
high damage attack champion who disrupts
enemy cooldowns and works well in both
PvP and PvE. The Cheshire cat has turned
into a darker, demonized version of
himself, using perfect veil, speed
manipulation, and chains turns to become
a dangerous damage dealer. What I like
most is the amount of content and how
many different team styles you can build
around, damage, control, support, or
factions. The visuals and effects are
also genuinely strong for a game that
runs on both PC and mobile. If you're a
new player, use my link in the
description or scan the QR code on
screen and you will instantly unlock
Narma the Returned, a legendary support
champion, plus Aina, an epic barbarian
once you reach level 15. New players can
also pick one of five promo codes for
another free legendary. Big Dog for
Turvold, Get Alice for Alice, Kitty Cut
for Cheshure Cat, Go Fast for Razlevar,
or Wrath for Grand Oak Padre. I would
personally go with get Alice because her
cooldown disruption is useful in a lot
of teams. You only have 48 hours after
installing and it has to be through my
link or QR code or the bonuses won't
apply.
Romania was one of the major
beneficiaries of the post-war reordering
of Europe. Not only did it receive
recognition of its control of Bessarabia
from some major powers, but it also
received other territory, including
Transylvania and Boina from the collapse
of the AustroHungarian Empire. Russia,
however, did not accept it. Despite
rebelling against the old imperial
system, the USSR still felt entitled to
all of the old imperial territory. As
far as they were concerned, Bessarabia
was under Romanian occupation. However,
the revolution and civil war had left
the USSR depleted and it was no longer
in a position to press its claim to the
disputed territory. So, this explains
why Bessarabia was disputed. How then
did Romania and the USSR try to address
the issue? The status quo in Bessarabia
held through the 1920s and most of the
1930s. Romania and the USSR were both
bound by the post Kellogg Bion
renunciation of war framework. Romania
signs the pact in 1928 and it entered
into force regionally through the
litenov protocol in 1929 but the
Basarabian dispute remained unresolved.
Formal diplomatic relations between
Romania and the USSR were not
established until 1934.
And even after that, relations were
cautious and somewhat tense. The USSR
refused to recognize the legitimacy of
Romania's claim. But some diplomatic and
trade relations continue. Romania also
faced tensions with Hungary and Bulgaria
over territories surrounded by three
potentially hostile neighbors. It was no
wonder that Romania sought foreign
allies. The Romanian elite had a strong
French inclination and Paris was eager
to build military alliances in the east
which led to a security pact between
them in 1926. France promised to protect
Romania from any foreign invasion as
part of their Cordon saniter against a
potential enemy. At the same time,
Romania cultivated good relations with
Germany as well. Romania's greatest
asset was its oil fields, which allowed
it to become one of Germany's most
important oil suppliers. Germany was
also Romania's largest trading partner,
which bounds the two countries closer
together. By the late 1930s, Romania was
virtually economically dependent on
German trade. Romania had hoped that
securing strong relations with both
Germany and France would keep it out of
any future conflicts and provide
sufficient protection against Soviet
aggression. But there was another
country who Romania courted that proved
decisive on the Basarabia issue.
Poland's independence from the Russian
Empire in 1918 was probably the most
significant development in Eastern
Europe after the war. From the outset,
Romania and Poland had naturally shared
interests and both feared another
Russian aggression. The two nations
signed extensive treaties in 1921 and
1926 to formalize their alliance and
both considered this alliance to be a
core part of their foreign policy
creating a united front against any
aggression in Eastern Europe. Bessarabia
was a minor issue in the Soviet mind
compared to Poland. Moscow was openly
hostile to Warsaw and considered the
Romanian Polish alliance to be a direct
attack on their interests. Romania's
ties with Poland even more than its
control of Bessarabia ensured that
relations between Moscow and Bucharest
remained icy.
But as with many issues in Europe,
Hitler's arrival in the 1930s made
things much more complicated. Romania
tried to maintain its balancing acts
between Hitler's Germany and the Western
Allies, but that became only harder in
time. The wild card in the situation
that would ultimately tip the balance of
events were Romania's own fascists, the
Iron Guard.
Founded in the 1920s, the Iron Guard had
enjoyed a steady rise in support over
the years, which worried the government.
Hitler's success in Germany emboldened
them and Berlin provided some indirect
support to them over the years, but not
enough to compromise their relations
with the Romanian government. In
February 1938, with the Iron Guard
gaining new heights in the polls,
Romanian King Carol II suspended the
constitution, cancelled elections, and
basically became a royal dictator. It
was a direct move to counter the Iron
Guard and he ordered their leaders
quietly arrested in the following
months. By now Hitler had bigger
problems to worry about. In September
1938 he annexed the Sudatan land from
Czechoslovakia after a diplomatic crisis
that consumed Europe. King Carol II,
conscious that Romania had its own
German minority and feared that Romania
might suffer the same fate, debated
between distancing himself from Hitler
or forging closer ties. The Soviets
watched everything carefully. In
September, the Romanians promised the
Russian foreign minister that Romania
would remain neutral if Europe went to
war and it would not ally itself fully
with Germany or go against the Soviets.
Attempting to discuss the Bessarabian
issue went nowhere, however, and the
Soviets refused to even look at
diplomatic documents from Romania that
claimed Basarabia as Romanian territory.
The Soviet response was not encouraging.
So, Romania continued to walk a fine
line of cozying up to everyone it could.
On November 24th, 1938, King Carol II
instead visited Germany. The discussion
was about the importance of German
Romanian relations. Carol also raised
the Bessarabian question. Would Germany
support Romania's territorial integrity
if Moscow decided to push the issue? He
was offered verbal asurances of support,
but not a formal guarantee, and those
asurances proved fragile. Later, King
Carol II returned with this assurance in
hand, failing to recognize how little
that word was worth. As the European
situation worsened in 1939, the question
of Bessarabia loomed like a shadow. In
February 1939, the Romanian envoy in
Moscow met with the Soviet foreign
minister Maxim Litvvenov and raised
concerns about Hungarian claims to
Romanian territory.
Litenov assured the Romanians that
Moscow rejected Hungarian claims.
Hungary was increasingly allied with
Germany after all. But when the envoy
tentatively asked about Bessarabia, the
minister was not so supportive. And what
shall we do? He asked if you decide to
join the Axis. By now, Carol's overures
towards Germany had convinced many in
Moscow that Romania was siding more with
the Axis powers. But that was far too
simple a view. In April 1939, Britain
and France issued guarantees to Romania
and Greece against aggression. But
Romania was simultaneously embedded in
treaties, alliances or friendships with
almost every other major power in
Europe. Ironically, it was Moscow that
was actually moving towards the Germans.
Maxim Litvvenoff was replaced as Soviet
foreign minister in May 1939 with
Vichislav Molotov. Molotov would lead a
more consiliatory approach to the
Germans from the Soviets, which would
prove disastrous from Romania and
Poland. The fruits of this new policy
came on August 23rd, 1939 with the
signing of the Molotov Ribbentrop Pact,
a non-aggression pact between Russia and
Germany. The two powers swore not to go
to war, allowing Hitler and Stalin to
focus on their own concerns elsewhere.
Unfortunately for Romania, though, the
Molotov Ribbon Pact contained secret
clauses recognizing Moscow and Berlin's
respective territorial interests.
Primarily, it was an agreement to carve
up Poland and the Baltic states between
them, but the Soviets made sure to state
their claims to Bessarabia.
Stalin promised that Soviet interests in
Romania began and ended with Baserabia
and would not threaten the oil fields
Germany relied upon. That was good
enough for Germany, who agreed to look
the other way when the time came.
When German troops stormed across the
Polish border on September 1st, the
world changed forever. Romania acted as
the escape route for thousands of Polish
troops and refugees, much to the
annoyance of Berlin. By the time the
Soviets invaded on September 17th, there
wasn't much of Poland left to save.
Stalin's invasion immediately set alarm
bells ringing in Bucharest. Not only had
Russia finally addressed its
longstanding territorial claim by force,
it had done so without Hitler lifting a
finger. Moreover, the Soviets informed
Romanian diplomats that their protection
of Polish refugees, soldiers, and
government officials, who they
characterized as Polish military gangs,
was a hostile act. To make matters
worse, on September 21st, Iron Guard
loyalists assassinated the Romanian
prime minister, Armand Kalanescu.
The prime minister was the strongest
anti-German voice in Carol's government,
and his death removed a major obstacle
to closer German Romanian relations.
Some historians argue German involvement
or encouragement was possible, but the
degree of direct German operational
control is debated. On November 30th,
1939, Stalin pressed another
long-standing territorial claim, this
time in Finland. The Finns put up an
impressive defense and inflicted heavy
casualties on the invaders, but Soviet
military might was overwhelming. And in
March 1940, Finland was forced to seed
massive amounts of territory. With
Stalin's ambitions in Poland and the
Baltic secured, Romania knew it would be
next. Romania's situation only got worse
when Hitler invaded France on May 10th,
1940, pitting Romania's two protectors
against each other. Swift German
victories pushed France and Britain back
within days, rendering Paris and
London's promises to protect Romania
meaningless almost overnight. Germany
was now the only possible ally Romania
had to defend against Soviet attempts to
take Bessarabia. But the secret clauses
of the Molotov Ribbonrop Pact ensured
that Romania was truly alone. By May,
Stalin had began amassing major forces
on the border with Bessarabia. Around
roughly 30 divisions alongside large
mechanized and tank formations, Stalin's
next move was obvious. King Carol
responded by sending tens of thousands
of his own troops to the border as well.
However, events were no longer in
Romanian hands. On June 23rd, the day
after France signed an armistice,
Foreign Minister Molotov informed the
Germans that Romania had to surrender
both Bessarabia and the additional
region of Bovina to the USSR. The
Germans could not care less for
Romania's pride. So long as the Romanian
oil fields were safe, Hitler did not
care. The Germans disputed the Soviet
demands only on the matter of Bovina. It
had been an Austrohungarian imperial
possession, not a Russian one, and was
home to many ethnic Germans. The Soviets
conceded the south of Boa and reduced
their demands to just the north. Without
any Romanian input, Berlin and Moscow
agreed to the terms. At 1000 p.m. on
June 26th, the Soviets informed the
Romanian government that they had 24
hours to acknowledge Soviet control over
Basarabia and northern Bokovina or the
Red Army would solve the issue for them.
King Carol summoned the German
ambassador Vhelm Vabbritzius to discuss
Romania's next move. Fabritzius had
received strict instructions from Berlin
to tell Romania to take the deal.
Fabitius warns the king that Germany
would not help them if they fought
Stalin over this and made it clear
Romania would face the realities of
modern war alone. Germany's promises to
protect Romanian sovereignty meant
nothing. For hours, the kings debated
with his ministers, considering his
options to resist with force. Any
realistic assessment confirmed that
Romania would be crushed in battle. to
fight was, in the words of the defense
minister, asking for disaster.
It wasn't really a question of if the
Soviets would take Bessarabia, but
whether Romania would waste lives trying
to stop the inevitable. Early in the
morning of June 28th, the Crown Council
painfully voted to accept the ultimatum.
The news was announced to the nation at
9:00 a.m. that morning. The Romanian
army was ordered to stand down and
withdraw from Bessarabia and northern
Boina without a fight. That afternoon,
Soviet troops rolled into Bessarabian
towns, casting themselves as liberators.
The Soviets proceeded to occupy all of
the territory without resistance by July
3rd. In the end, Romania's military
weakness and geography, German Soviet
collaboration in the Molotov Ribbentrop
Pact, the fall of Romania's ally France,
and Hitler's consistent
untrustworthiness meant that Romania had
no choice but to give up in front of
Stalin. It was a humiliation that
Carol's government never recovered from.
Germany would soon force Romania to give
up northern Transylvania to Hungary in
August and southern Door Bruia to
Bulgaria, driving the final nail into
the coffin of King Carol's government.
On September 5th, he abdicated and was
replaced with a pro-German dictatorship.
The government had spent years trying to
save that province by stalling,
bargaining, and playing rivals against
each other. And those moves bought time,
but not protection.
Don't forget to use my Raid: Shadow
Legends link below or scan the QR code
on screen to claim your new player
bonuses. Two free legendaries and an
epic waiting for you.